Metrics {#metrics}
=======

Autopush uses both a legacy metrics system and a new metrics system. The legacy system is based off of `statsd` and a new system built off of `prometheus`. The legacy system reports operational metrics to a `telegraf` instance. The `prometheus` system is only used to report reliability metrics currently.

The legacy system is configured using the `AUTO*_STATSD_*` environment variables described in the [configuration](./config_options.md) documentation. The `prometheus` metrics are only enabled if the `reliable_report` feature has been enabled. (Note, this feature is automatically included in the `production` feature.)

The legacy metrics are described in the `autopush_common::metric_name::MetricName` enum. These are operational metrics that generally act as incremental values to track functional status. These are generally captured on an internal dashboard and are monitored for system health.

The `prometheus` metrics capture the count of trackable messages that are currently in various states of delivery. Messages are considered "trackable" if they have a VAPID public key that matches one of the `AUTOENDPOINT__TRACKING_KEYS` values. Currently, for our production system, these are messages generated by FxA as part of the Tab Operations feature (e.g. "Send Tab to Device"). Note that Push cannot read the data, nor can it associate that data with an individual. (As a side note, tracking that level of detail would be prohibitively expensive, a violation of several privacy policies and laws, and would potentially expose user data.) The states that the reliability metrics track are discussed in the [reliability](./reliability.md) documentation.

It is worth noting that eventually, more metric information may be converted from statsd to prometheus, but that is still being evaluated. (Some of the "hold ups" are non-technical in nature.)