# The impact of post-quantum cryptography on Autopush

The following are collected observations and comments about the impact of post-quantum cryptography on the Autopush service. Please note that this is reported, and the opinions here are expressed by, someone with very limited knowledge of cryptography, (pre or post quantum). These comments are based on understanding of the environment as of April 15th, 2026.

## The Current State of Autopush

Autopush relies on several distinct elements, each with their own cryptographic requirements. It's worth noting that the design of autopush does not rely on a single point of failure in this process, and if one element is compromised, there are still additional barriers. It's also worth noting that the value of attacking WebPush messages is fairly low value. It's far more likely that any malicious action would be taken without needing to compromise the cryptography of the system, instead going for good ol' malicious programming.

### The Push Endpoint

The push subscription endpoint is the URL used by subscription providers to send subscription endpoints to the user's device. It consists of the device specific User Agent ID (UAID), the application specific Channel ID (CHID), and the optional VAPID public key. The value is combined, and then encrypted using the [fernet](https://github.com/mozilla-services/fernet-rs) library. [Fernet](https://github.com/fernet/spec) is a symmetric encryption method that uses AES 128 in CBC mode (with PKCS7 padding). It is not quantum safe, however the values contained in the URL are not overly sensitive. The UAID is a random UUID value, that might be used to associate to a given user device, but since this is part of a subscription URL, the subscription provider is more than likely already tying that value to a user's account. What the encryption really is doing is preventing DDoS or walking attacks, by establishing a primary barrier to entry. If the value doesn't decrypt, it's immediately rejected.

### The VAPID Key

VAPID uses a JSON  Web Signature (JWS) based on ECDSA with the P-256 curve. The VAPID header is a JASON Web Token structure, so the actual body of the token is not encrypted, but encoded as base64. There's no sensitive information contained in the claims. The VAPID header is also used to validate the origin of the message, since the VAPID public key is included with the subscription request and is included in the subscription endpoint. If this value is compromised, a different party could forge messages. This may or may not be a problem, but depends on if the attacker also has broken the encryption key for the messages, or if the web-app can accept "data-free" messages to perform actions.

### The Message Encryption

Finally, the body of the Subscription Update is encoded using ECDH with the P-256 curve, and then encrypted using AES 128 in CTR mode. The private key for the message encryption is generated by the User Agent and is never disclosed. The subscription provider also generates their own, complimentary, per message encryption key set, with the public key bound to the message. (This also includes the required salts and padding.) Again, these are not quantum safe.

### Elliptic Curve Cryptography

It's also worth noting some of the principles of elliptic curve cryptography. The security of elliptic curve cryptography relies on the difficulty of the Elliptic Curve Discrete Logarithm Problem (ECDLP). In simple terms, given a point on the elliptic curve and a scalar multiple of that point, it is computationally infeasible to determine the original scalar. This is what makes ECDSA and ECDH secure against classical attacks. However, Shor's algorithm, which is a quantum algorithm, can solve the ECDLP efficiently, which means that if a sufficiently powerful quantum computer were to be developed, it could break the security of ECDSA and ECDH. These systems are not inexpensive or readily available. For now, and possibly for the foreseeable future, one must consider these to be in the domain of "state actors".

In addition, breaking elliptic curve cryptography currently requires [between 1098 and 2124 logical qubits](https://postquantum.com/security-pqc/algorithm-quantum-ecc/). While advances in quantum computing will undoubtedly reduce this number, it is still a significant barrier and cost.

## Summary of Attack

### Thread Matrix

| Attack Vector | Difficulty | Value | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Break fernet encryption to gain UAID, CHID, and VAPID public key | High | Low | The UAID, CHID, and the VAPID public key are not sensitive, and are all subject to change at any time. |
| Break VAPID key to forge incoming message | High | Low | The VAPID key is used to validate the origin of the message, but does not contain any sensitive information. Note that while operations like "SendTab" use WebPush, the data sent in the subscription update does not include tab information. That information is exchanged using a separate system. |
| Break message encryption to forge message | High | Low | The message encryption is used to protect the content of the message, but the content is limited to < 4KB and tends not to be sensitive. |
| Gain public key associated with subscription endpoint | Very High | Low | The public key is stored with the subscription provider and is only exchanged once, when the subscription is created. It is also stored on the User's device, but we are not considering attacks on the user's device in this analysis. |

With this in mind, let us consider what would be required in order to attack the Autopush system. Using the subscription endpoint, an attacker would need to break the fernet encryption in order to gain the UAID, CHID, and VAPID public key. They would then need to break the VAPID key in order to forge the incoming message. They would also then need to gain the public key associated with that subscription endpoint from some source, craft a complimentary key pair to encode a new subscription update message, then deliver it to the push endpoint.

After all of that, the payload (remember, you only get < 4KB of data) would need to crafted to cause some form of harm.

Also, the UAID, CHID and VAPID public key are also semi-ephemeral and may change at any time.

### Adoption of Changes

Allow me to take a quick aside. Subscription providers are not particularly good at staying "up-to-date" on things. Over half of the subscription updates that Autopush receives use the out of date "aesgcm128" encoding, or the VAPID v1 format. Both of these have been deprecated for over a decade. If we were to adopt a brand new, quantum safe set of encryption methods, I fully expect that they would not be adopted and we would, at best, see only a third of our traffic use them. It's also worth noting that the content of most push messages tends not be particularly sensitive and the value of attack is fairly low.

## Conclusion

At this time, I do not believe that the current state of post-quantum cryptography poses a significant risk to the Autopush system. The barriers to attack are high, and the value of attack is low. Additionally, the adoption of new cryptographic methods by subscription providers is likely to be slow, which means that even if we were to implement quantum safe methods, they may not be widely used. For now, it seems prudent to continue monitoring the developments in post-quantum cryptography and reassess the situation as needed.

### For Folk interested

Martin Thompson, one of the authors of the WebPush RFC, has suggested the following for folk interested in making Push more secure against quantum attacks:

> This is a good question, which could have a straightforward answer.  Almost.
>
> The obvious thing to do here is switch to [ML-DSA](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.204.pdf).  That's a pretty simple thing to do.  There are even codepoints allocated for it (see https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-cose-dilithium).
>
> The problem is that base64 encoding ML-DSA public keys and signatures will likely blow the top off any header field size limits you would reasonably have on your servers.  ML-DSA-44, which might even be a shade on the weak side, would produce a roughly 5k header field.  Larger than the largest message size.  Header compression in HTTP/2 will help, if client and server were willing to reserve that much space to remember that stuff.
>
> Of course, we would probably need to revise the spec, but that's a fine project for you, if that's what you wanted to do.  Other PQ transition projects are probably higher priority - impersonation for WebPush is pretty low stakes, particularly given the voluntary self-identification involved - but this seems straightforward enough.
>
> If we were willing to move more slowly, there are other design choices we might consider to get sizes down to something more reasonable (the PLANTS working group is tackling some of that), but I suspect we'll not want to wait for all that stuff to settle down before acting.  And the ML-DSA route isn't completely unworkable.